---
title: SHACL2DTDL -- The RDF Shapes to DTDL translator
---

* **GitHub Repository:** [RealEstateCore/SHACL2DTDL](https://github.com/RealEstateCore/SHACL2DTDL)
* **Author:** [Karl Hammar](https://karlhammar.com)

The SHACL2DTDL converter is a tool that translates a SHACL ontology into a set of [DTDL](https://github.com/Azure/opendigitaltwins-dtdl) Interface declarations for use, e.g., with the Azure Digital Twins service. 

It maps SHACL NodeShapes to DTDL Interfaces and PropertyShapes to DTDL Properties or Relationships.

## Example usage

```dotnet run -f C:\path-to-SHACL-file -i C:\ignore-file.csv -o C:\output-path```

## Options

```
  -f, --file-path         Required. The path to the on-disk root ontology file to translate

  -o, --outputPath        Required. The directory in which to create DTDL models.

  -m, --merged-output     Sets program to output one merged JSON-LD file for batch import into ADT.

  -i, --ignorefile        Path to a CSV file, the first column of which lists (whole or partial) IRI:s that should be ignored by this tool and not translated into DTDL output.

  -s, --ontologySource    An identifier for the ontology source; will be used to generate DTMI:s per the following design, where interfaceName is the local name of a translated NodeShape, and ontologyName is the last segment of the translated shape's namespace: <dtmi:{ontologySource}:{ontologyName}:{interfaceName};1>.

  --help                  Display this help screen.

  --version               Display version information.
  ```

## Supported SHACL features

### sh:NodeShape

* Named node shapes are translated into DTDL Interfaces.
* Anonymous node shapes are ignored.

### sh:PropertyShape

* Property shapes that have sh:Datatype set, or that have sh:NodeKind set as Literal are translated into DTDL Properties.
    * Schemas are translated from XSD -> DTDL primitives, see source for exact mapping.
* Other property shapes are translated into DTDL Relationships.
    * As DTDL only allows a single Target definition per Relationship, we only map such properties that target singletons. More complex properties are ignored (for now).

### rdfs:domain and rdfs:range

* Data properties with a NodeShape in their rdfs:domain are translated into DTDL Properties
* Object properties with a NodeShape in their rdfs:domain are translated into DTDL Relationships. 

### owl:AnnotationProperty on owl:ObjectProperty

OWL annotation properties that have an object property defined as their rdfs:domains are translated into DTDL Properties on the corresponding DTDL Relationships (see above). Per this approach, the property-graph behaviour of DTDL can be loosely emulated in OWL.

### Documentation and Deprecation

* rdfs:labels become DTDL displayNames; language tags are maintained.
* rdfs:comments become DTDL comments; language tags are maintained.
* Entities that are marked as deprecated (i.e., are annotated with the property owl:deprecated and the boolean value true) are ignored in translation.

### DTMI Minting

DTMI:s for named shapes are minted based on the shapes' URIs by concatenating five components: 

* The `"dtmi:"` prefix
* The `ontology source`, either given by a CLI option (`-s`), or generated by reverting the hostname and concatenating with the path segments excluding those that go into the `ontology name` or `local name`, see below
* The `ontology name`: the last fragment of the URI before the `local name`
* The `local name` of the shape
* The DTMI version identifier; for now hardcoded as `";1"`

E.g., `https://w3id.org/rec#Building` becomes `dtmi:org:w3id:rec:Building;1`. If the CLI option `-s rec4` is given it becomes `dtmi:rec4:rec:Building;1`